1 - Jarrod and I decided to take a look at tweets from U.S. Senators. Tweets
represent one of the most direct ways senators can communicate with the public.
Every senator has a twitter account, although we’ll see that some of them are
much more active than others. 

2 - In addition to obtaining timelines and followers for each senator from the
Twitter API, we obtained data from the sunlight congress api. In particular,
this told us the party affiliation of each senator, whether democrat,
republican, or independent. We had some difficulty merging the two data
sources, since the twitter data on the sunlight api was out of date.

3 - The questions we want to answer with this data break down into four
categories. First, we look at how often senators tweet and whether this
correlates with popularity. Then we look at the network of senators and the
degree to which they follow each other. Finally, we look at particular
hashtags, as well as words and phrases, and how they differ by party.

4 - This graph shows tweet frequency on the x-axis and number of followers on
the y-axis, both on the log scale. Throughout the talk, democrats will be shown
in blue, republicans in red, and independents in purple. We see here that there
doesn’t seem to be a relationship between how often someone tweets and how many
followers they have.

5 - Cory Booker, a Democrat and the junior senator from New Jersey, is the king
of senate tweeters, with nearly 50 tweets a day and over a million followers.
John McCain, republican from Arizona and former presidential candidate, is also
hugely popular, although he doesn’t tweet much. Al Franken’s official senate
twitter account has only 500 followers. He does have another popular campaign
account.

6 - We were curious to see if senators followed each other. The colored
elements in each row of this matrix indicate the followers for a particular
senator. In contrast, the columns indicate who a particular senator follows. In
each case, we order the senators by party and by number of followers. Because
you can follow someone on twitter without them following you back, this matrix
isn’t symmetric.

7 - These diagonal portions of the matrix indicate republicans following
republicans and democrats following democrats. As expected, both of these are
higher than the following rates across parties. Democrats in general seem to
have lower following rates than republicans do. We should probably take these
results with a grain of salt, since many of these accounts are maintained by
staffers.

8 - We can also visualize the relationships in a graph. In this plot, the size
of each point is proportional to the LOG of a person’s total followers. Again
McCain and Booker stand out. I won’t go into the details of how this plot is
generated, except to say that although it includes a random element, in all
versions we get a clear separation between the two main parties.

9 - Now we move to hashtags. Since a new senate class began in January, we’ll
only go back that far. We see here the most frequently occurring hashtags
during that time. SOTU (state of the union) was popular in both parties, and we
also see things like net neutrality, a popular hashtag with democrats, and
obamacare, mentioned much more frequently by republicans.

10 - Since tweets have a date and time associated with them, we can also track
the usage of a given hashtag. Here we see how tweets about the Keystone XL
pipeline relate to three key votes, as the bill moved from house to senate and
back to the house, and then was vetoed by Obama on February 24.

11 - Now I’ll say a bit about the text processing we did on each tweet. On our
first pass through the data, we removed entities like handles and hashtags, we
tokenized, and we removed stop words. We soon realized that a lot of our
results contained place names: names of states and names of senators. So we
added two processing steps: at the beginning we search for names of places. We
need to do this before tokenization since some place names have two words, like
“North Dakota.” We also removed the first and last names of individual
senators.

12 - Our cleaning is still not totally perfect. As I’ll discuss at the end of
the talk, the handling of place names is still problematic. Also, the name
matching doesn’t include nicknames, so David would get removed but Dave does
not.

13 - This table shows individual words that are used at least five times as
often by republicans as by democrats. Obama shows up 3 times, with obamacare,
obama’s, and lotus. The number of senators responsible for the tweets is in
parentheses. For example, UNI stands for university of northern Iowa, and the
senators from that state tweet about the sports teams there very often.

14 - Here is a similar table for words used more frequently by democrats. We
see more issues emerging here, although it also seems likely that some of these
words are used frequently together, like equal wage or wage gap. I’ll come back
to this issue.

15 - For any word, we can look at the concordance to see how it’s being used.
Here are some examples of obamacare as described by republicans. We see
negative words like horror, hurting, and struggling.

16 - As expected, the words for democrats are more positive: happy, benefit,
and helping. Although we didn’t do this, it would be interesting to use
sentiment analysis on tweets associated with different hashtags or phrases.
Although in some cases, like Obamacare, we could probably predict the results,
it would also be interesting to see whether emotions change at all over time,
or whether one party tends to be more negative than another overall.

17 - We also did a similar analysis for two word phrases, which are called
bigrams. What’s interesting here to me is that the phrases that are used more
frequently by democrats are all about specific issues. Republicans mention one
issue, tax reform, but they also point readers to specific resources much more
often than democrats do, using phrases like “listen live”, “listen here”, or
“details here”.

18 - We also used latent semantic indexing to visualize the word usage of the
two parties in a lower-dimensional space. Treating each senator’s complete
collection of tweets as a document, it’s easy to distinguish between democrats
and republicans based on only two sets of word weights, or “topics.” However,
these results should be viewed as preliminary for a reason I’ll discuss now.

19 - We noticed that the word “ans” showed up in both of the first two topics
from LSI. Looking at the concordance, we see that this word shows up in places
that seem to imply people, such as “young ans” and many “ans” We realized that
this is an artifact of taking out our place names. For example, “Hawaiians”
becomes “ans” when you remove “Hawaii.” So we haven’t fully gotten rid of the
place names. 

20 - These names for groups of people from a specific place are called
demonyms. Our next step in the processing is to take these out too.
